---
title: Making clinical research useful
date: 2017-11-21 16:00:00 -0300
lang: en
ref: useful
layout: post
description: I shamelessly borrow the definition of useful clinical research from John P. Ioannidis
---

Clinical research should be useful, says John P. Ioannidis, a greek statistician that devoted his carrer to point out that most clinical research are really not so useful. This is the minimum that anyone should expect from clinical research. And what are the features that we can use to judge if a particular research and its results may really contribute to science and society? Dr. Ioannidis gives us eight proposed characteristics of useful clinical research in a recent opinion statement [1].

1. **It must be problem-based:** one must summarize it in a very clear, objective question, clinically meaningful. _Could HDAC inhibitors be used to treat diffuse midline gliomas_ is an example, albeit a weak one (I shall elaborate further on this). 
2. **The problem must be placed into context:** prior knowledge has to be assessed in order to map possible holes in the evidence framework and contextualize the problem. For instance, _review of published evidence tells us that there is no known pharmacological treatment for diffuse midline glioma_ (again a weak example).
3. **The study must be powerful enough** or, in other words, recruit so many patients and be sufficiently long as to have a practical chance of answering the proposed question. The design of a study may use statistical calculations to find its optimal recruit number and time length. A possible example: _using the available data of the patients already treated in our service as a pilot group, assuming an odds ratio of 0.05 and choosing a statistical power of 80% and alpha of 0.5%, the minimum number of patients in the experimental group (in a 1:2 design) will be 16 patients_.
4. **Aplicability in real life settings:** does the study design mirror real life situations? If there are differences, do these have an impact in the main outcome? Clinical trial that use real life treatment designs are called _pragmatic trials_. This concept was introduced to identify trials aimed at answering questions that inform decision-makers ("practical or pragmatic questions") in contrast to so-called _mechanistic trials_, designed to explore mechanisms of disease [2].
5. **Usefulness for the patients** must be the core tenet of clinical research. It may sound too obvious however one would be surprised of how many research is done with minimal care (if at all) for patients' quality of life issues. Patient-centered outcomes, as a matter of fact, are rather uncommon in clinical research. The majority of outcomes used are surrogate ones chosen for feasibility purposes. For example, one may study not the time to death (overall survival), an outcome meaningfull for patients, but instead the survival 6 months after treatment (much easier to perform although its relation to overall survival may not be easily predictable).
6. **Cost benefit:** really nothing new here. Plainly, is the research worth the money society will spend on it? The answer may ve viewed as a result of the compliance to the other characteristics of a useful research.
7. **Is it within our reach?** Do one have the resources to perform the research in a way that maximizes its usefulness? If not, why bother? Again, it should be common sense but the sad reality is that most clinical research **never get published** [3]. Some of them may fail for lack of resources, which is then an avoidable cause of wasting time and money.
8. **Transparency:** this is the most difficult goal to attain in clinical research, and probably is the most important of all. Reporting all information from the idea inception until the final results of a project may not be  realistic nowadays. However, it should be a major target of the efforts to further research usefulness.

This is what this project is about.

## References:
1.  Ioannidis JPA (2016) Why Most Clinical Research Is Not Useful. PLoS Med 13(6): e1002049. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1002049
2. Tunis SR, Stryer DB, Clancy CM. Practical Clinical TrialsIncreasing the Value of Clinical Research for Decision Making in Clinical and Health Policy. JAMA. 2003;290(12):1624–1632. doi:10.1001/jama.290.12.1624
3. Riveros C, Dechartres A, Perrodeau E, Haneef R, Boutron I, Ravaud P (2013) Timing and Completeness of Trial Results Posted at ClinicalTrials.gov and Published in Journals. PLoS Med 10(12): e1001566. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1001566
